# Alan Turing

Alan Mathison Turing OBE FRS (23 June 1912 – 7 June 1954) was an English mathematician, computer scientist, logician, cryptanalyst, philosopher and theoretical biologist. Turing was highly influential in the development of theoretical computer science, providing a formalisation of the concepts of algorithm and computation with the Turing machine, which can be considered a model of a general-purpose computer. Turing is widely considered to be the father of theoretical computer science and artificial intelligence. During the Second World War, Turing worked for the Government Code and Cypher School (GCHQ) at Bletchley Park, Britain's codebreaking centre. For a time he was head of Hut 8, the section responsible for German naval cryptanalysis. He devised a number of techniques for breaking German ciphers, including improvements to the Polish bomba kryptologiczna, the development of a procedure (the Turing–Welchman bombe) that could have been the only practicable means to break many Enigma-enciphered messages in time for Allied action, and widely considered the first description of a stored-program computer. After the war, he worked at the National Physical Laboratory, where he designed the Automatic Computing Engine, one of the first designs for a stored-program computer. In 1948 he joined the University of Manchester, where he helped develop the Manchester computers and became interested in mathematical biology, proposing a mathematical model for pattern formation in morphogenesis, which became known as reaction-diffusion systems. In 1952, Turing was prosecuted for homosexual acts and was given experimental oestrogen hormone therapy as an alternative to prison; he died in 1954 from cyanide poisoning, aged 41, an inquest having declared suicide, though some speculate it may have been accidental.
